---
title: 'Agent/Environment Symmetry and Entropy/Free Energy Duality in Bayesian Mechanics'
date: 2022-05-10
permalink: /posts/2022/05/FEP-MaxEnt/
layout: post
usemathjax: true
tags:
  - projects and papers
  - reading guides
---

Here I discuss a lengthy new paper of mine entitled _Towards a Geometry and Analysis for Bayesian Mechanics_ (preprint arXiv:2204.xxxxx, cited here as [Sak2022]), as well as an accompanying collaborative paper entitled ... (preprint arXiv:2204.xxxx, cited here as [RSTK+22]). I'll give broad overviews of both papers, contextualising their results and walking through the thought process. The rest of this post will be devoted to an in-depth look at Sections 4 and 6 of [Sak2022].[^1] The second paper, [RSTK+22], speaks for itself, I think—that's the beauty of working with skilled collaborators.

In any case—if I were to file this post under an MSC code, it would probably be 51P05, 'classical or axiomatic geometry and physics.' Allow me to explain why.

In the 1900s, modern mathematical physics came to become what we know it as today: an exercise in mathematics, tethered loosely to physical motivations. This is a little too self-deprecating to be true, but it's correct in the sense that _most_ of modern physics is far more abstract than it was prior to Einstein's great insights into the geometric nature of relativity, where general relativity and the equivalence principle mark a real turn in the way theorists do and think about physics. In particular, our understanding of gravity, quantum fields, strings, and even classical physics have all been formulated in purely mathematical terms, especially geometric ones. Suspiciously absent from this list? Thermodynamics. That's not totally fair either—Kolmogorov, the father of probability theory, worked quite a lot in what we might today identify as statistical physics. But the fact remains: the complicated systems described by statistical mechanics, such as thermodynamical systems, condensed matter, and soft matter or biological systems, are complete mysteries. From the perspective of axiomatic, mathematical formulations of physics, anyway, we have little idea how to characterise these systems in any general, rule-based fashion.

These papers gesture at how we might do just that—take a new physics for self-organising statistical systems, Bayesian mechanics, and put some geometry onto it (and some analysis, too). 

To zoom way out, there are really two things going on in this paper: one is the aim, and the other is the method. It's best read with this dichotomy in mind, in that the point of the paper can seem detached from the techniques used if one doesn't. We _aim_ to place an example of the FEP on solid mathematical ground. This has sort of been done in the monograph and key prior papers (e.g., a Fri2012, PDCF2019), but they're all a bit rough, especially when it comes to questions about ergodicity, stationarity, approximate Bayesian inference, and solenoidal flows, questions which have been famously kicked about in the literature. The problem with grounding the free energy principle in solid maths and physics is that free energy is sort of mysterious. There's not a lot of work showing what properties it has, especially not in probability theory, which is unfortunately key to the questions we wish to answer (if we wish to answer them formally). There's some [very nice work](https://cedricvillani.org/sites/dev/files/old_images/2012/07/P01.MV-FPReview.pdf) out there looking at entropy in a potential, whose maximum is identical to a free energy minimum. And there's a tonne of formal work on entropy. That motivated me to introduce entropy as the object of interest, rather than free energy, without loss of generality. This equivalence is actually proven throughout Section 4 of the paper, and it turns out we can get everything from the FEP back from entropy in a potential (this is how we think of duality in physics, cf. the holographic principle, S and T duality, double copy gravity; that every calculation has a corresponding item on the other side of the duality). But there's a second, more subtle transformation, which I've tried to call attention to: entropy in a potential only really makes sense if we look at the potential (and thus entropy) as something on an agent's states, rather than environmental states. Maybe that seems innocuous enough to you, or maybe you object to that; it turns out we need to do quite a lot of work to make sense of this mathematically, but conceptually it's quite the same thing. Indeed, we get everything from the FEP back, just through a different lens. This is exemplified in an adjunction, a type of mathematical relationship which _always_ hides some highly non-trivial structure behind an apparently simple pair of opposites. The sequence I'm talking about is evident in Section 4, where we explicitly pass from free energy to an entropy functional on beliefs to a self-entropy under a constraint. Sections 2 and 3 are all the backdrop to that sequence, motivating the _techniques_ used—_not_ the paper itself. So remember: in [Sak22], we don't set out to rewrite the FEP. We just need some better leverage to make sense of it, so we transform it a little. To quote Chris Buckley, we've left the front, made gains elsewhere, and returned with new weapons. This is a common enough way of working in pure mathematics, but can be a bit tricky to get right. It's also tough to read without deconstructing a bit, but hopefully I've taken care of that here. One of the ultimate takeaways from this paper is that if one buys into max ent—and most people do—one automatically buys into some form of the free energy principle. Conversely, whenever one uses the FEP, they get max ent for free.

The partner to this paper is [RSTK+22], which _does_ take all of this new stuff and contextualise it within the FEP. Here is where the duality and the passing to maximum entropy gets upgraded from a mere technical tool to an actual statement about the FEP, and about what it means, conceptually. This also has a dichotomy in aim and method, which again risks seeming incoherent, but actually makes it doubly interesting (or interesting for potentially different reasons, in any case): under Maxwell Ramstead's incisive eye and the collective effort of the entire R&D Group, we _aim_ to bring the construction more firmly to the FEP. My paper gets away from the FEP in several spots where entropy really takes over (there's a joke somewhere in there), and it has some unexplored implications for what the future of the FEP might look like, that we really wanted to address. The way this is achieved is largely by taking that construction and making it readable. This is not trivial: my paper is purely formal. Although not the stated aim, in effect I treat the FEP as an interesting question in biophysics that justifies doing some nice maths. It turns out I don't need to think about free energy at all, and we're off. The group's paper actually focusses on the FEP and relates these new results, derived in the context of entropy, to existing (and hopefully future) results in the FEP. 

A key to the construction (another one, anyway, I feel like I've called a number of things keys at this point) is that dual pairs are a special sort of equivalence: dualisation preserves a pair of objects (in fact, adjunctions are an isomorphism of Hom sets of objects, if that means anything to you). Simultaneously (dually? [double dually?](https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/space+and+quantity)) they invert the morphisms between objects themselves. So, by dualising, we're telling the _same_ story from two totally _different_ points of view. 

---


So, to summarise: this paper is focussed on the form of the synchronisation between internal and external; shows that the Markov blanket only plays a secondary role; and reformulates this synchronisation in terms of maximising entropy wrt constraints; then since maximising constrained entropy has been extensively studied in the past, with a lot of literature in it, you show how this can be put these in the service of Bayesian mechanics. [paraphrased from Lance Da Costa]

[^1]: As usual, my motivation for this is along the lines of readability—for interdisciplinary audiences, like the target of this work, mathematical papers can be a bit inscrutable on a first read. Due to the common structure of papers in maths, they can be a quagmire of technical statements without all the perspective one would like—the idea is, this should help orient readers through the paper. Blogging informally or writing more expository material about one's results has become common in pure maths for this reason. 
