---
title: 'Updates on Bayesian Mechanics (Bayesian Mechanics IV)'
date: 2022-11-20
permalink: /posts/2022/11/BMech-IV/
layout: post
usemathjax: true
published: false
tags:
  - projects and papers
  - reading guides
  - Bayesian mechanics
---

In a whirlwind tour of the last few months of papers, I'll update the interested reader on what has transpired in the world of Bayesian mechanics. 

Mention Urs quote somewhere here

I hope you will consider my article, `Towards a Geometry and Analysis for Bayesian Mechanics,' for publication in the \emph{IMAJAM}. This paper takes a version of the free energy principle, previously a poorly understood theory with wide reaching claims about biological physics and self-organisation, and places it on firm mathematical and physical grounds.  This fills in gaps left in other papers in the literature and points very clearly towards an axiomatic description of complex systems via the principle of maximum calibre. It is my belief that this is an extremely important result, since it both clarifies the nature of the sometimes controversial FEP, and in doing so, gestures towards a faithful axiomatic framework for biological self-organisation and complexity. The article has already garnered broad readership and even citations, with many in the theoretical biology community finding value in the results. \\


Additionally, many results of independent interest to the applied mathematician are generated. Throughout, new results\textemdash like a gauge theory for random dynamics under the principle of maximum entropy\textemdash are provided. These are given in an effort to tidy up the far reaching vision of the FEP, in the tradition of mathematical physics. These results have come to underlie an emerging field known as Bayesian mechanics [arXiv:2205.11543, arXiv:2206.12996] which is gaining attention in fields like stochastic dynamical systems theory, complex systems theory, statistical and biological physics, machine learning, applied category theory, and other fields still. \\
